In this video we're learn about some of the commonly used C++ primitive data types.
These types are also sometimes called fundamental data types because they're implemented directly by
the C++ language.
The types we'll discuss in this video are the character types the integer types which include both signed
and unsigned integers.
The floating point types and the Boolean type.
It's important to keep in mind that unlike many other programming languages the size and precision of
C++ is primitive data types are largely dependent on the platform that you're working on and the compiler
you're using.
This means that as a C++ programmer you need to be aware of your specific machine and understand how
much storage is allocated for these types to effectively use them.
The C++ include file C limits contains information about the size and precision of the data types for
your specific compiler
as you know computer store information using a binary representation which consists of zeros and ones.
And these fundamental type sizes are expressed in bits.
The more bits allocated to type the more unique values that can be represented.
Also the more bits the more storage that's necessary to represent that type in memory.
In this table you can see how many values can be represented in a given number of bits.
The formula used to calculate these values is to raise to the number of bits power so we can store 256
distinct values in 8 bits sixty five thousand five hundred thirty six distinct values and 16 bits over
four billion distinct values and 32 bits and over 18 billion billion distinct values in 32 bits.
Now let's take a look at the specific primitive types one at a time.
The C++ character data type is used to represent characters such as the letter A x and so forth.
The character data type is often implemented as 8 bits which means it can represent a maximum of 256
characters.
This is plenty to represent the alphabets from many spoken languages.
However some spoken languages have thousands of characters and in many cases multiple symbols are combined
to form single characters in order to support these languages.
C++ supports a wider character type that can be as large as necessary to represent these characters.
Unicode is a common standard used to represent multiple character sets for any language.
When we work with characters in this course we use the char data type since it easily supports the Latin
character set.
C++ also supports the integer data types.
Integers are used to represent whole numbers both signed and unsigned integers are supported.
There are many variants of the integer data type.
Let's take a look at some of them the following tables show the C++ integer data types for both signed
and unsigned integers.
In addition to those shown in the table it's possible to store both sides and unsigned integers into
character data type.
Notice that some of the keywords in this table are bold and others are italicized.
Also typical sizes are included in the table.
For example if you want to declare a signed integer you don't need to use the signed keyword so it's
by default.
Integers are signed.
Similarly if you want an integer type that stores very large numbers you can simply declare the type
as long long and you'll get a signed long long integer if you want unsigned integers that is integers
that are zero or positive values only.
Then you're required to use the unsigned keyword.
I know this may seem a little confusing with all the optional keywords but it's not so bad if you just
think that by default all integers are signed.
I know what you're thinking.
Which ones these do I use in my application.
And the answer is It depends.
If you want an integer variable of stores ages then you could use an unsigned int or even an int if
you want an integer to represent the number of kilometers between the planets that you probably want
to use an unsigned long long for most applications using it is perfectly acceptable.
But you do need to keep in mind the limitations especially when you perform math on variables and store
results in other variables.
Since the results may not fit into the variable you're saving too.
This could cause an overflow.
Well look at a specific example of an overflow in life code.
At the end of this video C++ also supports floating point types.
These are used to represent non integer numbers such as real numbers numbers like 1.2 0.5 and pi.
It's important to understand that computers have finite storage and many real numbers have an infinite
number of digits after the decimal point.
Pi is a perfect example of this.
In these cases computers store an approximation of the real number.
There's no way the computer can store numbers such as pi precisely floating point numbers are represented
internally by the computer as signed numbers with a mantissa and an exponent.
You may remember your scientific notation from school one point two three four times.
Tend to the seventh power.
That's the way they're stored internally.
This isn't something you need to worry about since it's handled automatically internally but it's important
to know that these are approximations.
There are three types of floating point numbers float double and long double.
Each has varying precision in size depending on the compiler.
Note that long double can store very very small and very very large floating point numbers.
The last primitive we'll learn about is the Boolean type.
The boolean data type is used to represent true and false values in C plus plus 0 is false and any non-zero
value is true.
C++ also includes the true and false keywords that are often used with a boolean type.
As you can imagine boolean types are used whenever you need to know if something changes state.
For example game over key pressed is invincible.
These are all good examples of using the boolean data type since values can be either true or false.
Great.
Now let's head over to code live and see some of these primitive types in action.
So now I am into code like ID and I've created a project called primitive types.
That's in the section 6 workspace in this C++ file.
I'm going to go over some examples of using the primitive types will start with carriages would do integers
of floating point numbers and then at the end will do booleans and also show you an example of an overflow
so you could see the typical behavior you get with this.
I've written the code ahead of time and I've commented out a lot of it and what I'll do is uncomment
and run pieces of it at a time so you can see it build.
So the first thing we want to do is take a look at this first example here.
This is a good example of using the character data type.
My middle initial is J.
So the variable name is called middle initial and it's character data type so it can hold a single character.
The way that C++ represent single characters is with single quotes around the J.
Do not put double quotes there that would make it a string and you'll get an error.
So what I'm doing here is I'm simply initializing the middle initial variable to J and then displaying
it right here in the output statement.
So I'll build and run and I'm just going to click here remember so it doesn't ask me my choice of the
time and I just want to build it execute you could see here it says my middle initial is J.
Exactly what I expect.
OK so now let me uncomment the integer types here the way that you can comment that uncomment lines
very easily.
Just select the lines you're interested in and just press control forward slash or command swards slash
on a Mac and that will toggle between comment and noncom it.
OK.
So in this case I've created a variable called the exam score and initializing it to 55.
Now exam score is an unsigned short.
And remember we have to say unsigned if we want our variables to be unsigned but I don't have to say
it I can simply say short.
So this is the same as saying unsigned short exam score some initialising that to 55.
And again I'll build and run and you could see my middle initial still J.
And my exam score was 55 OK.
In this case we've got another number.
Uncomment that out the number of countries represented in my meeting we're 65 and I'm initialising it.
This is a simple integer by default.
It's going to be signed.
And here it's going to say there were sixty five countries represented in my meeting.
So let me run that again I'm pressing control 5 on windows just to use the shortcut and you can see
here there were sixty five countries represented in my meeting.
Now in this case we've got a much larger number than the uncomment these two lines out.
So now I've got people in Florida that's my variable name.
This is the state I live in.
And there are 20 million 610000 people living in Florida.
The last I just checked on Google.
So I'm defining this as a long.
I'm hoping that that fits in in the long.
It's a pretty big number.
I'm pretty sure it does.
Let's try that.
So our press controls five again run it and you can see there are about 20 million 610000 people in
Florida.
Now in this case how about number of people on earth our income at those two lines and you could see
my variable name is people on earth and there are about seven billion six hundred million people on
earth.
Now something that's interesting is as these numbers get bigger and bigger and bigger they're hard to
read.
It's really easy to forget zeros and so forth.
So the C plus plus 14 standard allows you to use as little tick marks right there you can put them anywhere
you want.
It really doesn't care just to make it easier for you to read it strips them out.
It just creates the number.
If this doesn't compile on your end most likely you're not using the C++ 14 compiler using the C++ 11
compiler.
You could set it to C plus plus 14 or you could just get rid of these little tick marks to make it compile.
So when I run this you'll see something interesting happen.
I'm pressing control F5 again.
Notice I'm getting an error the error says error narrowing conversion.
It's trying to fit that number into a long and it doesn't fit.
This is one of the benefits that I mentioned about using the list initialization right here with the
curly braces.
Notice what happens if I did that actually you know what.
Let me just run this first as a long long which is really what I want because otherwise it's not going
to fit.
So I've got my long long and I'm going to build and run this.
And you can see there are about seven point you can see the numbers correct.
But if I did a regular initialization like a C-style initialization with an equal sign here or an assignment
statement something like that.
And we'll go back to long because we know it's not going to fit long and our build and run again look
what prints out there are about negative 9 8 9 9 9 people on earth.
That's an example of an overflow.
But you also notice that we didn't get an error.
That's one of the benefits of using this initialization.
If I use lists in initialization it will catch those problems for me at compile time which is really
really nice.
So again I'll compile here.
Control at 5.
Boom there's the error.
I know I've got a problem.
I can fix it so I'll make this a long long.
OK.
So hopefully that makes sense.
Always use that list initialization syntax it's so much better.
In this case I want the distance to Alpha Centauri.
That's pretty far.
This is I believe in kilometers and kilometers is that's what my output statement says uncomment these
two lines.
And let's run this.
And you can see that the distance to Alpha Centauri is and that's my number that's correct.
OK so that's a good example of it overflow sure.
Another example of an overflow at the end of this source code that may not be as obvious as this.
OK so here's a couple of examples using floating point types.
Remember these are real numbers these are numbers with decimal points.
So in this case my car payment is 400 one dollars and 23 cents.
I can uncomment this out obviously if I try to store for a one point two three into an integer I've
got a problem because the integer would only hold the whole number.
So the point to three would get truncated off it I could have a problem.
So in this case let's run this.
And now you can see that my car payment here is 401 23 OK if I want to store a larger number I could
use a double.
In this case I'm just storing PI and I'm hard coding pi to be three point 1 4 1 5 9 it could be obviously
much much longer.
And in this case it's a double and you can see that there is Pi three point 1 4 1 5 9.
I can also store very large and very small numbers using long doubles.
So in this case I'm storing 2.7 times tend to the 120 with power.
That's a very large number.
Number to store that into this large amount variable and then I'm going to display it.
So that's built and run and you can see 2.7 times tend to the 120 with power is a very big number.
You can see it's actually storing that correctly.
The last one we'll look at is the bully and type the Boolean type is a true false value.
So in this case comment that you see I've got a variable called Game Over.
You is the correct underscore style here.
I've got a variable called Game Over.
And in this case you could see that I've been working on a project that's using camel case muscle memory
kicks in.
So in this case I've got a variable called Game Over and I'm initializing it to faults and then I'm
saying the value of game over is.
And you might expect that this would print up faults here but it doesn't print up vaults.
What it does is it prints out 0 because as far as C++ is concerned 0 is.
If it was true it would print out a 1.
Now here's an example of an overflow that's not so obvious and a comment that out here I have a variable
called value 1 and I've got another variable called value 2.
They're both short integers and I'm assigning 30000 to this one and 0 0 0 to this one.
Those numbers will fit in those variables.
But then I'm going to create another variable called sum.
And I've got a value 1 times value 2.
Now I know that this the product of those I guess I should of called it product would be called product
just to be a little bit more correct here.
Here we go.
So I know that the product of those two numbers does not fit in a short.
So let's compile this
and you could see that the sum of 30000 and 1000 is some negative number.
Obviously that's an overflow error.
Be very careful with these things.
Make sure that sure those two pieces each will individually fit in the shorts but the products certainly
can't.
But notice the compiler is helping me get a compiler warning.
You've got potentially a narrowing conversion here.
So don't ignore those warnings as the computers do a pretty good job about predicting problems that
can happen.
OK so that concludes this video.
You can see some simple examples of creating variables initialising variables using some of the C++
primitive types.